So let's look a bit closer into how the DICOM files are organized.
A single DICOM file,
as we have just mentioned,
contains within itself meta information and the DICOM data set,
which is the key value, basically,
collection of key value pairs that represent the metadata,
the text metadata of the DICOM file.
Also, it contains the pixel data as we have discussed.
Pixel data in general, in DICOM,
can contain multiple frames,
which is commonly used in ultrasound acquisitions.
For 3D medical imaging data sets like a CTUs and Amar's,
pixel data elements typically contain
just one frame which has a single slice through the patient.
When you put it together,
you have series, which is represented as collections of such files.
Basically, a single image within a series represents,
as we have discussed, a single slice,
which is one of those cardinal planes that go through the patient.
It is important to note here,
you might have noticed that the meta information from the DICOM files and the metadata,
the key-value pairs, they are repeated in every files,
so there's a lot of redundancy in DICOM data sets.
A lot of data is being stored,
a lot of the same data has being stored in many DICOM files,
and this is just something that you have to deal with.
So DICOM format is
redundant with respect to data and if you want to optimize the storage,
it makes sense to combine those data sets somehow.
This is why people have thought of other formats which are
more suitable for machine learning pipelines.
So let us take a quick look at the DICOM data set,
which is represented by files on a file system.
What we can see here is a set of directories that
represent different patients on a file system.
If we open one of those,
we can see here two studies which represent as we have discussed,
different patient sessions with the scanner,
and you can see that in this case we're looking
the directories that contain the studies that are actually named in meaningful ways.
So those are different data points, different time points.
If we go into a study,
we can see a collection of directories that
represent different series within this data set.
Again, they are conveniently named in this data set.
If we open one of those series,
we can see a collection of DICOM files here.
So now, let us look at some of the aspects of the DICOM standard.
One of the key concept with the DICOM standard is the notion of SOP classes.
SOP stands for service object pair.
So DICOM objects like MR scans or
CT scans are also called a DICOM speak Information object definitions.
An SOP, a service object pair defines a pair of
a service like storage and an objects like MR object.
So there is a list within a DICOM standard that
defines all possible objects that could be stored.
Let's take a quick look at that.
So this is a page within DICOM standard parts 3.4, Parts 5 of that.
This is a list of all SOP classes.
As you can see, we have different things here like computer through geography image,
or here's our CT image information object definition.
Here's our MRO image information object definition.
There are many others.
You are welcome to take a look through that.
You can see that each one of those SOP classes,
which is a format of storage of one of those objects,
has a unique identifier.
These identifiers will come up as you're analyzing medical imaging data sets.
This identifiers are the most reliable way of telling what exactly are you looking at.
For example, this CT image IOD has this identifier,
and you can just look up this UID in
your data set even if you're just opening it in a hex editor,
and it will tell you exactly what the image you're looking at.
Now, let's take a look at another important aspect of a DICOM data set,
which has a set of data elements.
We have talked how DICOM file stores this key-value,
collection of key value pairs which represent
different metadata that gives us some information about the file.
This key-value pairs hold important for information about our files.
Let's take a look at the standard,
which has the list of all those key-value pairs.
So if we look at this Part 3.6 of the standard,
we have a registry of all DICOM Data Elements.
You are welcome to take a look at that.
This is a list of all possible metadata items that DICOM files may contain.
You can see there are things here like image type,
and there are things here like instance creation time,
and there are things here like content date.
So everything and anything that you need to
know about the image is defined in those data elements.
One thing to note here,
is that this data elements are not mandatory.
They may or may not be present in a DICOM file.
This is also defined in the standard.
One other important thing to note about this data elements,
is that each data element is uniquely identified by the spare of numbers,
which is the group identifier and the data element identifier.
So some DICOM processing libraries,
they allow you to look up the data elements by just using these numbers.
Some DICOM data processing libraries will turn these numbers into a meaningful names.
We will look at some of those libraries when we will do the exercises
and we will look at the anode book later in this lesson,
and we'll see how Python libraries can be used to read those data elements.
Just a couple of other important things to know about these data elements.
First, you can see that there are
quite a few data elements that have UID as part of those.
So those UID are unique identifiers associated with an image.
You can see that we have a thing like SOP instance UID,
which uniquely identifies current instance.
There is a subclass UID,
which uniquely identifies a instance class.
So this would be one of those sub-classes that we have just looked at,
MR or CT image storage.
One other thing to note here is that we have this VR column.
VR basically defines the data type that this data element is stored in.
For example, this sub instance UID has UIVR,
which means that this is a unique identifier.
Whereas the specific character sets of data element here
has a CS data element which means that it's a string.
So another important thing about the data elements is that as you browse through them,
you will see that there is a instance UID,
there is a series UID,
there is a study UID,
and all of those are mandatory elements,
whereas there is no patient ID.
Well, there is a patient ID,
but it's not a mandatory element,
and it's not a UID element.
So it is important to know as you're analyzing DICOM data sets,
that actually DICOM format does not define unique ID for the patients.
With each data set that you analyze,
you need to understand what identifies a patient within this data set.
Now, let's take a look at those data types that we have in the DICOM format.
Again, as before, the standard has a very nice page in Section 3.5,
Chapter 6.2, which has a list of
all possible data types that exist in the DICOM Standards.
So we have things here, all these acronyms,
as you will see when you are browsing through the standard and looking up data elements,
they are expended here and there are very precise definitions of what those means.
We have things like decimal strings,
we have the date/time format,
we have floating point numbers,
and many other things.
As you're analyzing DICOM datasets and as
you're thinking of relying upon different data elements,
I encourage you to look at the standards,
and look at those data elements,
and understand how exactly they are stored,
and what DICOM standard tells us about
the way that the data elements should be formatted.
Also keep in mind that DICOM Standard is not very prescriptive,
any of the rules can be broken.
So nothing in the DICOM Standard really prevents you from storing something
in the data element which does not conform with formatting rules.
For example, if we look at the standard here, the unique identifier.
Unique identifier paragraph here
tells us that this should be a numeric component separated by period.
If you try to write a set of alphanumeric characters in your unique identifier field,
many DICOM libraries won't prevent you from doing that,
and this will be considered even as a valid DICOM file by some viewers,
but this would not be valid for DICOM Standard.
One other thing to be aware of when you're looking at
DICOM data is that there is such thing as data element types.
As you will be looking up the DICOM Standard for
a particular information object definitions like
the MR IOD definition that we are going to look at in about a second,
you will see that there are
different data element types there like type 1 or type 2 elements.
So the type defines whether the element
has to be present in a particular IOD or whether it's optional.
We will see an example of that in our MR IOD definition.
So now, let's look at one of those Information Object Definitions.
This is how the DICOM standard tells us what has
to be in a particular information objects?
What are the data elements which are mandatory and optional for a particular data types?
Let's look at one for MRI imaging modality.
So again, this is the DICOM Standard,
Section 3.3, Chapter A.4.3.
We have a nice table here that defines a set of modules.
So these are groups of DICOM data elements,
these are organized in groups for convenience.
We can see that we have the patient group,
we have the study, we have series, we have image,
and we can see that we have these values here which is the usage column,
we have values which tells us whether the module is mandatory or user optional.
For example, the device module.
If you go in here,
you will see some fields and you might see that
these things might be useful like device ID,
for example, or device serial number.
Maybe this is how you'd want to tell apart
the different scanners that were used to produce the images,
but you can see that actually,
the entire module here is user optional,
so it's not mandatory,
so you are unlikely to find it in many datasets.
Whereas, the image plane module is mandatory.
If you go in there, you will see that every MR IOD, basically,
every DICOM file that represents an MRI image should have these values,
and these are values like pixel spacing.
As we will see later in the course,
pixel spacing is quite important to understand what is
the resolution of our image and how our images relate to a physical space,
and what are the sizes on the screen?
Some other important elements are the orientation elements.
We will look at those a little bit closer but they basically tell
us how the image is oriented with respect to the scanner, and so on.
Also, all these modules in IODs,
they come with a pretty elaborate description.
I encourage you as you're
analyzing DICOM datasets to look through those if you would like to
understand which elements you should be relying on when
analyzing your datasets and we're processing them or especially,
as you start getting into things like resampling and resizing
your imaging datasets as you prepare them for machine learning workflows.
So another quick thing about the DICOM files
is that DICOM files are stored as binary on the file system,
and even without any tools or even without any DICOM image viewers,
you can get a quick idea of what's in the DICOM file.
If we look at this DICOM directory here that we looked at earlier,
and if we open one of those files in a hex editor,
we will see here a lot of binary,
but if you look at it closer,
you will see some patterns here.
So first, every DICOM file in
the metadata section has to have 128 bytes of free-space, that's what we have here.
Then we have this keyword,
DICM, every valid DICOM file has that.
This is how you know, even without any special tools,
that you are dealing with a DICOM file.
Then you start seeing some patterns.
So this thing should be familiar,
we've talked about unique identifier,
so this is exactly what they are.
The first one here is actually the subclass UID.
So even without having any special tools,
I know that this 114,
this is an MR subclass IOD,
and that I'm dealing with an MR image.
So this is a quick hack that will let you
understand what type of data you're dealing with
and if this data is even a valid DICOM data
without having any specialized tools at your disposal.
Here is a quick recap of the glossary.
DICOM stands for Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine,
this is the standard that defines how medical images are stored and transmitted.
SOP stands for service-object pair,
this is a pair of an object which is like MR image or a CT image,
and a service associated with that.
We've talked about storage,
this is how images are stored on the hard drive,
but there are other services which we'll touch upon in further lessons.
VR is the value representation,
essentially, a data type of a DICOM element.
DICOM elements, also called DICOM tags,
these are the key value pairs that store
metadata about the DICOM files, your medical images.
So this has been a long section and this was a lot to go through.
We have looked at the DICOM Standard.
DICOM Standard is huge, and it's very important,
and it's used by every single medical imaging modality.
You don't have to know it all but it is very
important to understand that this standard exists,
that it's published on the web,
and there's always a place where you can go for a reference.
We will keep coming back to this concepts throughout the course as we will
do in exercises and doing other lectures on the subject.
A few key takeaways: one,
DICOM files, the 3D medical images,
they are stored as files on a file system and they're organized in collections that
represent series which are multiple images composing 3D volume,
and then studies which are multiple series,
and the toll relates to the patient which has images associated with them.
DICOM has the concept of valid data,
but you can also store invalid data in DICOM files,
and you might run across those so keep that in mind as you're analyzing DICOM datasets.
So in further lessons,
we will look at another important imaging formats called an FT,
this is the form of the sure likelihood to run across if
you'll be participating in imaging competitions
or if you will be preprocessing
your DICOM datasets and preparing them for machine learning pipelines.